[Music]
well hi unless you're very lucky like me
most of us have had braces at one time
or another in our lives who doesn't want
a nice brilliant smile getting braces
can fix bigger problems that could
affect you later in life - like jaw
alignment but how does all that metal in
your mouth really work in short what
braces do is apply pressure to the teeth
to encourage them to move into the
correct position inside the mouth kind
of like kindergarteners at recess tooth
has a name and charts of the correct
position of each tooth are found all
over the dentists and orthodontists
office first you'll most likely have a
consultation with your orthodontist that
someone who specializes in the structure
of the mouth and moving your teeth in
order to correct your jaw and to give
you some straight teeth of course for
example most of us have a slide or
significant under bite or overbite
this is due to jaw misalignment and
braces we'll fix that your orthodontist
will also make sure you have a generally
healthy mouth before your journey with
braces begins in other words you can't
have a bunch of cavities or some
infection of the mouth before you get
your braces so brush those teeth most
orthodontic patients are in their early
teens but nowadays it's not uncommon for
adults to get braces - your orthodontist
may choose to apply or adjust your
braces in phases or continuously each
case is totally individualized why might
someone need braces some of it has to do
with genetics if crooked teeth run in
your family you might have crooked teeth
too if you sucked your thumb or pacifier
a lot as a baby this can affect how your
baby teeth grow in so if you need braces
it's not your fault let's look a little
closer at the process before your braces
are applied you may have to have
additional treatments first a good
example of this is applying an expander
there are two kinds
upper jaw and lower jaw what does an
expander do let's look at the upper jaw
as our example an expander will stretch
the bone and cartilage of the hard
palate before it stops growing ideally
it would be applied before the age of 14
it prevents teeth from crowding and
preps the mouth to have room for your
braces metal rings are attached to the
back molars the body of the expander
which will contain expansion screws will
stretch from ring to ring across the
mouth as the screws are cranked it'll
push on those back molars and stretch
the soft cartilage of the palate over
several weeks it's common for patients
to get a gap in their front teeth over
the course of this process and that's
good this means the expander is working
but it sounds kind of painful so have
ibuprofen on hand and some cold treats
like popsicles or ice cream
pull boy most people will feel the
pressure on the back molars and will
feel some discomfort in their teeth
perhaps behind their nose and eyes or in
their temples but this tenderness will
go away eventually once your mouth is
prepped by the expander or any other
equipment you may have needed and the
day arrives to get your braces put on
your orthodontist will first clean and
polish your teeth so that those metal
brackets have a nice clean surface to
stick to braces may look simple but
they're actually made up of a few
different parts that all work together
bonding material the bracket arch wire
ligature elastics spacers orthodontic
bands if you need them and a carburetor
no not that last one I just snuck that
in the list the bonding material helps
each bracket really stick to each tooth
the arch wire slides in between each
bracket this connects the brackets and
helps to pull the teeth together over
time if you had an expander your teeth
are probably a little more spaced out
than when you start it so something must
pull those teeth back together into the
desired position everyone can identify
the ligature elastics because you can
pick their color
or for a purple myself these colorful
elastics connect the brackets to the
arch wire they do a lot of the work in
straightening your teeth so they're
usually changed and tightened each time
you visit your orthodontist not everyone
needs orthodontic bands but if you do
they're used to connect one bracket or
brackets to another to pull certain
teeth into alignment each bracket has a
tiny hook on it say you need a top tooth
pulled in a certain direction an
orthodontic band would be hooked on to
the bracket of the tooth in question and
the band stretched down to and hooked on
the bracket of a bottom tooth acting as
the anchor these are bands that you
would change yourself usually between
meals your orthodontist or one of their
aides should explain each part of the
process to you and may even have you
practice in the office if you have to
change any bands by the way have you
ever heard the orthodontic marching band
well brace yourself now that we know the
parts of the braces let's look at the
actual mechanics of all this how does
all this stuff straighten your teeth
well it's all about applying constant
but tolerable amounts of pressure over
time most of this pressure comes from
the wire and ligature elastics and the
brackets hold it all in place during and
after the teeth have moved that wire
that connects your brackets plays a key
role in moving your teeth wire doesn't
generally like to bend but heat from
your mouth makes the wire more flexible
it'll still want to stay straight but be
flexible enough to bend to your
particular mouth shape this is where a
lot of the pressure comes from if you
have a particularly complex case that's
where those orthodontic bands come in
these will apply additional pressure and
will provide extra help in moving more
stubborn teeth remember though your
teeth are bones and you're only seeing
the tips of them the rest of them are
anchored in your gums which are soft to
allow movement most of the hard work
your braces are doing is being done
under your gums the pressure you feel on
your teeth is also being applied to the
periodontal mem
rain the soft tissue underneath your
gums one side of this membrane is softer
than the other allowing the teeth to
move the other side pushes back somewhat
under the pressure creating a perfectly
balanced push-pull action that allows
your teeth to move safely and
effectively besides a straight smile and
proper jaw alignment braces have another
benefit they make your teeth stronger
just like working out at the gym your
teeth get stronger as they withstand the
pressure that's being applied to them
it also helps create new cells which
results in better bone density and your
teeth this means they'll have a stronger
defense against any oral problems that
may come along later and will be less
likely to move again after your braces
come off which is usually after about
eighteen months to two years
alrighty it's now two years later so
what does happen when your braces come
off do the clouds open up the Sun shines
down and the angels sing well it might
feel like that to you your orthodontist
will remove any extra bands the wire and
ligature elastics then he will just pop
those brackets off with a little tool
that kind of looks like pliers your
orthodontist will probably have you
brush your teeth well right there in the
office so that he or she can try to
remove any remaining bonding agent from
your teeth hmm
agent bond oh you have double-oh-seven
in your mouth get outta there
it's common to get a removable retainer
after your braces come off this little
thing helps keep your teeth in place
there are permanent retainers - they're
just a thin wire that would be glued on
the inside of your top or bottom row of
teeth if your retainer is removable your
orthodontist will tell you to wear it
every day down the line you may just be
able to wear it while you sleep of
course keeping your oral hygiene after
your braces come off is huge brush your
teeth at least twice a day use mouthwash
and floss the retainer itself should
also be clean if your retainer is
removable your orthodontist might let
you pick the color
now all of this may seem overwhelming
that's a lot of stuff in your mouth
right braces aren't generally considered
a comfortable experience and require a
lot of tolerance and work you may
experience headaches too because of all
the pressure on your teeth and jaw if
you're experiencing an abnormal amount
of discomfort talk to your orthodontist
you may be able to adjust your treatment
in some way but just remember the many
benefits of your braces the more hard
work you put in and the more you follow
your orthodontist directions the better
your results will be having braces is a
brief journey but at the end there's a
straight smile for a lifetime waiting
for you if this video was helpful give
it a like and share it with a friend bye
don't go straightening your teeth just
yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos that you
can really sink your teeth into just
click to the left or right stay on the
bright side of life